---
layout: post
title: Day 265&#58 Semaphores and mutexes. Mutices. Muticii.
permalink: day-265.html
comments: true
---


## Hacker School: day 265.

*(My batch ended on August 22, 2013, but as they say, [never graduate](https://www.hackerschool.com/).)*


I'm sort of embarrassed to admit that I never had a really good handle on how the basic concurrency primitives are implemented. I'm now pretty glad I started to dig into this, because most of the analogies people use to describe mutexes and semaphores are slightly wrong.

## Mutexes at a high level

A **mutex** is a portmanteu of the words *mutual* and *exclusion*. At a basic level, it is a variable that all concurrently-executing threads can see, which *stops concurrent threads from accessing a block of code*. Consider the following pseudo-code:

```c
do_something(x) 
lock_mutex(s)        // "lock" mutex using variable `s`
f(x)                 // CONCURRENT ACCESS ON THIS CODE IS PREVENTED
unlock_mutex(s)      // "unlock" mutex
do_something_else(x)
```

Some notes:

* In this case the mutex is the variable `s`.
* All the concurrent threads can see `s`.
* In this case, `x` is a resource shared among the threads.
* When one thread "locks" on `s`, it changes the state of `s` so that all the other threads know that another thread is executing that code.
* Later it "unlocks" `s` to indicate to the other threads that the code can be safely run.
* So, in order for a thread to call `f(x)` in this code block, it needs to wait for `s` to indicate that it is free *and* it needs to acquire the lock.

Note that a mutex **does not** necessarily prevent multiple threads from accessing *data* concurrently -- it only prevents concurrent access to *code*. In the example above, `x` could be altered by the `do_something` or `do_something_else` functions. The only code that's restricted is the call to `f(x)`.

In other words, **to protect against concurrent access to data, you have to use mutexes to lock access to all the *code* that touches the data.**

That is what a mutex does. But what is a mutex? What type of thing is `s`?

At the system level, the mutex `s` can be implemented using a *normal global integer*, using the following assumptions:

* If a thread tries to access the shared resource and `s == 0`, (*i.e.*, it doesn't have the key) then we will take that to mean that the resource is currently being used by another thread.
* If `s == 1`, then it is free to be accessed.

This leaves the problem of how different threads can cooperate by changing the value of `s`. Dijkstra, who invented all of this, proposes that manipulation should happen using only a pair of curious functions, `P`, and `V`:

```c
P(s)  // "lock" mutex using variable `s`
f(x)  // DO STUFF HERE TO SHARED RESOURCE x
V(s)  // "unlock" mutex
```

So, what do these functions do?

* `P` (standing for the Dutch *proberent*, meaning "to test"), will basically test "lock" the block of code against concurrent access, or block until it can acquire the lock. More specifically, it will check the value of `s`, and if `s == 0`, then the thread will suspend the thread and wait until `s != 0` to proceed. If `s != 0` (and, if necessary, the thread is resumed), then `P` will immediately decrement `s` and return.
* `V` (standing for the Dutch *verhogen*, meaning "to increment"), which will basically "unlock" the code block, so that other threads are free to acquire the lock and execute the code. More specifically, the function simply increments `s`. If there are waiting calls to `P`, this function will restart one of them.

In other words, the current thread will wait at the call to `P` if `s == 0`, and will resume execution when the thread that's currently using the resource `x` calls `V` to increment the variable `s`. On the other hand, if `s == 1`, then we will simply decrement `s`, which will "lock" against concurrent calls to `f(x)`.


## Mutexes are not like locking a bathroom

Brief interlude. It's often said that mutexes work like keys to a bathroom. The thinking goes, there is one key, and customers have to acquire the key to unlock and use the bathroom.

I don't like this analogy. It's not obvious from this analogy that the lock applies to the *code* and not the *data*, which I think is an important distinction.

A mutex is not like a bathroom key. A mutex is like a mutex.


## The semaphore at a high level

It turns out that the variable `s` has a name -- it's called a **semaphore**. Slightly more formally, a semaphore is a variable that:

* is an integer, and
* can only be manipulated with the functions `P` and `V`.

A *mutex* is just a semaphore that is used to guarantee that only one thread is accessing a bit of code at a time. It does this by forcing `s` to be either 0 or 1--either the resource is currently being used, or it is not.

When `s` doesn't have to be a 0 or a 1, then it is usually called a *counting semaphore*. In contrast to a mutex, a counting semaphore will stop a thread from accessing a part of the code **if and only if n other threads are concurrently accessing the data.**

When is this useful? Suppose there is a buffer of n things to consume, and new threads must wait only when there is nothing in the buffer. In this case:

* Some number of "producer" threads can continually produce new things and place them in the buffer, and then call `V`, which increments the semaphore `s` to signal that one more thing is available for consumption.
* Concurrently, a number of "consumer" threads can continually call `P`, which will degrement semaphore `s`, indicating that a thing in the buffer is being consumed. If there are 0 things, then the consumer threads will block until the producer threads produce something.

This is called the "consumer-producer" model.

## How is the semaphore implemented?

Since the mutex is implemented using a semaphore, the question is now how the semaphore is implemented itself. They're not a part of the pthreads standard, but they are a part of the POSIX standard, so the implementation is in `semaphore.h`: 

```c
#include <semaphore.h>
int sem_init(sem_t *sem, 0, unsigned int value);
int sem_wait(sem_t *s);  // P(s)
int sem_post(sem_t *s);  // V(s)
```

I've annotated the source with what I think is going on here. Just to see what's up in the implementation.

```c
int
sem_post (sem_t * sem)
{
  int result = 0;
  sem_t s = *sem;

  // check for invalid semaphore state. EINVAL indicates that argument `sem`
  // is not a valid semaphore.
  if (s == NULL)
    {
      result = EINVAL;
    }
  // Attempt to lock on this semaphore. This lets us check do things like
  // validation checks on the semaphore, like the fact that it's not < 0 or
  // greater than the maximum number.
  else if ((result = pthread_mutex_lock (&s->lock)) == 0)
    {
      // Unlock and emit error code if semaphore is invalid.
      if (*sem == NULL)
        {
          (void) pthread_mutex_unlock (&s->lock);
          result = EINVAL;
          return -1;
        }

      // Check that semaphore is less than the maximum value
      if (s->value < SEM_VALUE_MAX)
	{
// This preprocessor directive appears to control whether it's a mutex or
// not? How odd. Note though that a binary semaphore is not always a mutex.
#if defined(NEED_SEM)
          // Increment the semaphore, or emit the error if that fails.
	  if (++s->value <= 0
	      && !SetEvent(s->sem))
	    {
	      s->value--;
	      result = EINVAL;
	    }
#else
          // "Release" a binary semaphore, or emit error if that fails. I
          // think this corresponds to releasing a mutex.
	  if (++s->value <= 0
	      && !ReleaseSemaphore (s->sem, 1, NULL))
	    {
	      s->value--;
	      result = EINVAL;
	    }
#endif /* NEED_SEM */
	}
      // Emit error if semaphore is not in correct range (i.e., [0,n])
      else
	{
	  result = ERANGE;
	}

      (void) pthread_mutex_unlock (&s->lock);
    }

  // Check results; emit error if necessary
  if (result != 0)
    {
      errno = result;
      return -1;
    }

  return 0;

}
```