---
layout: post
title: "Day 266: The unfamiliar world of OS X syscalls"
permalink: day-266.html
comments: true
journal: ■
---


## Hacker School: day 266.

*(My batch ended on August 22, 2013, but as they say, [never graduate](https://www.hackerschool.com/).)*


After [learning a bunch about concurrency primitives Yesterday](day-265.html), I decided it would be fun to have an operational understanding of their implementation. So I decided to boot up `dtruss` (which is like `dtrace`, but for OS X) and look at the syscall pattern under different cool concurrent scenarios.

I started by running `dtruss` on this very simple program that I wrote:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <semaphore.h>

int main()
{
    sem_t mutex;
    sem_init(&mutex, 0, 1);
    sem_post(&mutex);

    return 0;
}
```

... which promptly caused my terminal to explode with a huge chain of syscalls that I did not recognize:

```c
SYSCALL(args) 		 = return
open(".\0", 0x0, 0x1)		 = 3 0
fstat64(0x3, 0x7FFF6AFE1260, 0x0)		 = 0 0
fcntl(0x3, 0x32, 0x7FFF6AFE14E0)		 = 0 0
close(0x3)		 = 0 0
stat64("/Users/alex/Desktop/fun/scratch/locks\0", 0x7FFF6AFE11D0, 0x0)		 = 0 0
issetugid(0x7FFF6B01D530, 0x7FFF6AFE1A30, 0x7FFF6B01D530)		 = 0 0
csops(0x0, 0x0, 0x7FFF6AFE14BC)		 = 0 0
shared_region_check_np(0x7FFF6AFDF408, 0x2, 0x55)		 = 0 0
stat64("/usr/lib/dtrace/libdtrace_dyld.dylib\0", 0x7FFF6AFE05D0, 0x7FFF6AFE14C0)		 = 0 0
open("/usr/lib/dtrace/libdtrace_dyld.dylib\0", 0x0, 0x0)		 = 3 0
pread(0x3, "\312\376\272\276\0", 0x1000, 0x0)		 = 4096 0
pread(0x3, "\317\372\355\376\a\0", 0x1000, 0x1000)		 = 4096 0
mmap(0x10B3E6000, 0x2000, 0x5, 0x12, 0x3, 0x100001F)		 = 0xB3E6000 0
mmap(0x10B3E8000, 0x1000, 0x3, 0x12, 0x3, 0x100001F)		 = 0xB3E8000 0
mmap(0x10B3E9000, 0x1F40, 0x1, 0x12, 0x3, 0x100001F)		 = 0xB3E9000 0
close(0x3)		 = 0 0

[... AND SO ON ...]
```

[Full printout here](https://gist.github.com/hausdorff/9226737#file-dtrace-output-for-very-simple-lock-test). Where's the initial call to `execve`? Have I really never run `dtrace` on OS X before? There were some similarities here (for example `fstat` is a Linux function too), but overall I had no idea what was going on.

**UPDATE:** found this [neat article](https://people.gnome.org/~newren/tutorials/developing-with-gnome/html/ch03s02.html) that actually has a remarkably similar trace! Wish I found that hours ago.

A lot of this looked to me like dynamic library loading, so I tried to run `clang` with `-static`, but I couldn't quite get it to work. Something about a missing library.

Anyway, a lot of the differences between my prior experiance and this seem to be because OS X is a BSD rather than a Linux. In any event I began looking everything up to see if I could piece together what was happening in kernel land to run this program.


## The story the syscalls tell

If you don't know OS X syscalls very well (I also don't!), you can have a look at the appendix at the bottom of this entry, where I kept my notes as I looked each of them up.

Here is what I think is going on in the syscalls above. A lot of this I'm not quite sure about/not sure how to find out more about. So some of it is pure speculation.

* Ok, actually I have no idea what the first command, `SYSCALL(args)` does.
* But, after that, we call `open` on the current directory. This returns a read-only file with file descriptor 3. (Notice where it says `= 3 0`? I think the 3 is the file descriptor.)
* We then inspect the folder with `fstat64` and do something to it (*e.g.*, duplicate it or something) with `fcntl`. Not sure what that something is, because the flag gets turned into an integer here, and I don't know how to map it back. After that, we close the folder with `close`.
* We then use `stat64` to find some information about the final of the binary I compiled, which you can see is called `locks`. After this, we check to see if it has elevated permissions with `issetugid`, and then use `csops` to inspect the signature of something at address `0x7FFF6AFE14BC`. (I'm not quite sure what's up here.)
* I don't know what `shared_region_check_np` is doing &mdash; I couldn't find it on google.
* We then seem to be using `stat64` to inspect a dynamic library that's part of `libdtrace`. Interesting! Would this go away if we weren't using `dtruss`? We subsequently `open` it, again with file descriptor 3. After `open`ing, we can clearly see *two* calls to `pread`, which will read `0x1000` bytes! The first one starts at offset `0x0` and the second starts at offset `0x1000`, but it looks like they're pointing at two different places. I wonder why.
* We call `mmap` 3 times to drop file descriptor 3 (*i.e.*, the dynamic library from `libdtrace`) into memory. I can't tell what protections or flags they're being passed in with (since I don't know what flag, *e.g.*, `0x12` corresponds to), but we are mapping `0x2000`, `0x1000`, and `0x1f40` bytes in, respectively. To different places in memory. Hmm.
* After this, we close the file holding this dynamic library.

After this, we check the status of quite a few library files:

```c
stat64("/usr/lib/libSystem.B.dylib\0", 0x7FFF6AFE0410, 0x7FFF6AFE1290)		 = 0 0
stat64("/usr/lib/system/libcache.dylib\0", 0x7FFF6AFE0110, 0x7FFF6AFE0F90)		 = 0 0
stat64("/usr/lib/system/libcommonCrypto.dylib\0", 0x7FFF6AFE0110, 0x7FFF6AFE0F90)		 = 0 0
stat64("/usr/lib/system/libcompiler_rt.dylib\0", 0x7FFF6AFE0110, 0x7FFF6AFE0F90)		 = 0 0
stat64("/usr/lib/system/libcopyfile.dylib\0", 0x7FFF6AFE0110, 0x7FFF6AFE0F90)		 = 0 0
stat64("/usr/lib/system/libdispatch.dylib\0", 0x7FFF6AFE0110, 0x7FFF6AFE0F90)		 = 0 0

[...]
```

I guess it's hard to know why we'd inspect so many of these files. I suspect they're dynamic libraries, and we're only loading `libdtrace` into memory with `mmap` because we need it. Notice that none of them return error codes, so we're definitely asking for information about files that exist.

Something that's a bit more mysterious is the huge number of calls to `mmap` that follow:

```c
mmap(0x0, 0x2000, 0x3, 0x1002, 0x1000000, 0x4)		 = 0xB3EB000 0
mprotect(0x10B3EB000, 0x88, 0x1)		 = 0 0
mmap(0x0, 0x17000, 0x3, 0x1002, 0x1000000, 0x6)		 = 0xB3ED000 0
mprotect(0x10B3ED000, 0x1000, 0x0)		 = 0 0

[...]
```

Notice the file descriptor is `0x1000000` &mdash; that seems very high, and I don't know what it's for.


But, all this comes to a head when, at the final two lines:

```c
sem_init(0x7FFF6AFE1908, 0x0, 0x1)		 = -1 Err#78
sem_post(0x7FFF6AFE1908, 0x0, 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF)		 = -1 Err#9
```

**We learn that actually I programmed these wrong, they error out, and nothing much happens.**

Ah, oh well.


## Final notes

Oddly enough, when you run this multiple times, things execute in a different order! If you have a look at the other tests in [the gist](https://gist.github.com/hausdorff/9226737), you'll see that many of them are quite alike, but occur in different order.


## Appendix: my notes on the syscalls

I've never really been much of a systems programmer. So I started cracking them open one by one. These are some of my notes. Some of them might be wrong!

* `open` takes a file path and opens that file for reading or writing, depending on the flag given as argument.
* `close` closes a file descriptor. After closing, it is open for reuse again.
* `fstat64` and `stat64` are functions that give us information (permission, inode number, *etc*.) about some file. In the case of `stat`, the file is denoted by a path; in the case of `fstat`, that file is denoted by a file descriptor.
* `fcntl` performs an operation (*e.g.*, duplication) on a file denoted by a file descriptor.
* `issetugid` helps library routines like those in glibc determine whether a process has raised privileges, which might be an issue if, *e.g.*, they accidentally load libraries off the path that might abuse these privileges.
* `csops` is used by system demons to verify the code sign -- the signatures that ensures certain important utilities are not tampered with.
* `pread` reads from a file descriptor starting at some offset.
* `mmap` maps files into memory. In other words, the file is opened and the byte locations of that file are mapped directly into the virtual address space of the running process. An argument determines where to start the map; if `NULL`, the kernel determines this.

Another curious note: a lot of string literals in these calls have a `\0` at the end. For example: `open(".\0", 0x0, 0x1)`. I think this is because they're all null-terminated C strings. So, this syscall is basically opening with no flags and (I think) read-mode.
